Why does liballocs have its own dynamic linker, allocsld?

The short answer is "to handle a corner case of memory layout".

The long answer is "conceptually, that's where all of liballocs
belongs".

To explain the corner case: it is about 'holes'. The allocation tree in
liballocs is a tree, i.e. it assumes proper nesting. So, for example,
the image of a shared library (a 'file') is assumed to nest properly
within a contiguous sequence* of memory mappings, while within it, there
are segments, and within segments there are sections and symbols, all
properly nested.

(* since these mappings are made piecemeal, constructing the
right 'sequence' of mappings is already a matter of some delicacy!)

However, conceptually a file's image in memory might not be properly
nested, because a file's address space may be sparse i.e. contain holes.
One could end up with something like this in memory.

     higher addresses
          ^   ...
          |
          
              +-------------------------+
              + data segment of libB.so +
              +-------------------------+
          
              +-------------------------+
              + data segment of libA.so +
              +-------------------------+

              +-------------------------+
              | text segment of libB.so +
              +-------------------------+

              +-------------------------+
              | text segment of libA.so +
              +-------------------------+
          |
          v   ...
     lower addresses
     
... because each segment is placed at its own virtual address by the ELF
headers; the internal address space of a library (or executable) can be
sparse.

This already makes it more difficult to implement a call such as
dladdr(), which maps an address to an object. So very sensibly, glibc
and any other sensible dynamic linker will not create mappings like the
above. It reserves a large contiguous area PROT_NONE, covering the whole
extent of address space of the library, then uses mprotect() to add
permissions appropriate for the segments. Since any internal 'hole' is
still mapped, albeit PROT_NONE, nothing will get mapped there and proper
nesting is maintained; files it loads will never overlap.

So is there a loader that we care about that doesn't do this? Yes! It's
the Linux kernel's ELF loader. It happily leaves a gap in the middle of
a DSO, and subsequent mmaps can put something in there, destroying our
proper nesting property. However, in a dynamically linked process the
only file that the kernel is responsible for loading is the dynamic
linker itself. (Wart: it's also responsible for loading the executable,
although we can prevent that by running the dynamic linker as a program.)

So everything is fine unless the following property holds: the dynamic
linker has a hole in its internal virtual address space, and the Linux
kernel mmaps something in the hole.

It was a long time before I witnessed this situation but it did
eventually happen (GitHub issue #47). The solution of allocsld is the
following.

- Ensure allocsld does not have an internal hole (we control how it is
linked).

- Binaries that are to use liballocs are only sure to work if loaded by
allocsld. If built using our toolchain extension, we set allocsld.so as
the requested interpreter.

Of course, allocsld is implemented as a 'chain loader' which just loads
the 'real' dynamic linker and calls it to do the work. However, it is
responsible for mapping the real dynamic linker into memory, so it can
do the PROT_NONE trick and ensure no hole is left.

That covers the short answer. The long answer was "conceptually, that's
where all of liballocs belongs"... there are many places where liballocs
could be a lot simpler if it had access to the private state of the
dynamic linker, not just its public interfaces. Implementing liballocs
as an extended dynamic linker is probably the Right Thing, but dynamic
linkers are complicated enough that the maintenance burden of that is
not yet viable to take on. As a hint about why this is the conceptual
right thing, consider that dladdr() mentioned above is essentially a
special case of the query functionality that is the main added value of
liballocs. dladdr() lets you query by address, but it only understands
'static' ('file') addresses, not (say) heap or stack addresses, or those
of any other allocator....
